JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

inside PIM and sends the results to an NPU for Softmax
computation. However, this introduces data transfer overhead
proportional to Lseq , and although PIM–NPU pipelining reduces the stall time, its use of two row buffers increases power
consumption by 1.74×. PIM-GPT [30] integrates Taylor-series
and Newton–Raphson–based approximation units to support
Softmax, but these dedicated units incur an overhead of approximately 0.64mm2 area and 304.59mW power. AttAcc [2]
and Duplex [4] integrate Softmax units into the logic die to
reduce memory traffic, but the area costs are substantial: AttAcc’s Softmax module occupies 1.38, mm2 , which is roughly
69× the area of the accumulator logic, and Duplex requires
a Softmax unit approximately 17× larger than its associated
GEMM module.
Sparsity-exploiting PIM architectures. Leveraging sparsity
in matrix computations can reduce both computation and
memory traffic by skipping zero or low-importance elements.
From this perspective, several sparsity-aware PIM architectures attempt to avoid sending unnecessary data to external
computing units and instead process it within or near memory to reduce data movement and latency [31], [27], [32].
SpaceA [31] deploys processing elements per bank and uses
a content-addressable memory–based cache to identify and
process only non-zero elements, achieving 13.54× speedup
over a Titan Xp GPU. pSyncPIM [27] enables per-bank early
stopping even under all-bank execution through predicated
execution, but its design introduces roughly 13.26× area
overhead compared to SpaceA. PIM-Potential [32] extends
the HBM-PIM architecture [21] and issues selective instructions under GPU-driven orchestration, achieving up to 3.00×
speedup over a GPU. However, all these techniques depend on
sparsity patterns known in advance, making them unsuitable
for LLM SDPA workloads where activation sparsity varies
dynamically. Consequently, they cannot detect or exploit dynamic sparsity inside memory or execute the entire SDPA
computation as an in-memory stream.
Overall, prior HW/SW co-design studies reduce the computational load of Softmax through approximation but still retain
expensive operations such as the exponential and division, or
preserve the global reductions, leaving its sequential bottleneck unresolved. PIM-based SDPA accelerators mitigate the
memory-bound nature by moving GEMV into memory, but
Softmax remains handled either off-chip or via large dedicated
units with substantial area overhead. Sparsity-exploiting PIM
architectures are optimized for static sparsity patterns and
therefore cannot adapt to the dynamic sparsity exhibited by
SDPA activations. These limitations highlight the need for (i)
a new function that fundamentally avoids Softmax’s structural
constraints, including token dependencies and global reductions, and (ii) an architecture that can immediately exploit the
dynamic sparsity produced by such a function inside PIM to
skip unnecessary computation and memory accesses.
IV. E LEMAX : A S PARSE AND PARALLEL R EPLACEMENT
FOR S OFTMAX
In this section, we propose Elemax to address three key
limitations of Softmax in the MHA: (i) long latency caused by

4

Fig. 3. Computational structures of Softmax, Softermax [16], Consmax [11],
and Elemax.

nonlinear and global reduction operations, (ii) accuracy degradation due to assigning non-negligible attention to all tokens,
and (iii) limited interpretability because uniform normalization
does not reflect the positional importance of tokens within the
context [6], [26]. Elemax is designed with minimal operations
to relax these structural and semantic constraints, and its form
naturally aligns with WTA behavior, enabling opportunities for
accelerated execution.
A. Elemax Design
To implement a lightweight computation that preserves the
positive output property of Softmax and its WTA behavior, we
design Elemax for the i-th score vector si as follows:
Elemax(si ) = wE (i) ⊙ ReLU(si ),

(2)

As shown in Eq. (2), Elemax applies ReLU to zero out negative inputs and thereby reproduces key Softmax characteristics
with a much simpler computation path. Its normalization effect
is achieved by multiplying a learnable parameter vector wE ∈
RN —defined per layer, head, and token—without enforcing
a probability distribution. This stabilizes the magnitude and
variance of S while removing the need for division-based
normalization.
Fig. 3 provides a visual comparison of the computation
flows of Softermax [16], Consmax [11], and Elemax as
Softmax replacements for generative LLMs. Unlike Softmax, Softermax, and Consmax, Elemax does not use the
exponential operation, eliminating both the maximum search
and subtraction step and the numerical risks associated with
division. Moreover, Elemax processes each element of the
input vector independently, enabling high parallelism. Because
it does not require synchronization across all elements of S
for summation—unlike methods that wait for all exponentials
to complete—its latency does not escalate sharply even for
long-sequence inputs.
Moreover, Elemax does not constrain the sum of its outputs
to 1; instead, it is designed to control sparsity and interpretability in a token-wise manner. In Softmax, the outputs for
each query are normalized to sum to 1, so as Lseq increases,
the average share that each token can receive decreases to
approximately 1/Lseq . When the number of actually important
tokens also grows with the sequence length, this limited budget
must be distributed across more relevant tokens, which reduces

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

the absolute attention value each important token can obtain.
As a result, the attention distribution becomes flat, known as
attention dilution [6]. In contrast, Elemax does not impose
such a normalization budget and can therefore form attention
patterns that are less sensitive to changes in sequence length.
In addition, because ReLU immediately sets negative values
to 0, Elemax naturally excludes low-importance tokens and
preserves contextual sparsity, in line with prior work that
explicitly enforces sparse attention distributions [25], [24].
Finally, the token-wise learnable parameter wE encodes the
contextual importance of each position and allows the model
to independently adjust the required focus strength at each
token, thereby improving interpretability.
B. Training Objective
Applying ReLU-based attention directly to self-attention
leads to two issues. First, unlike Softmax, ReLU does not
normalize the scores to sum to 1, which causes the variance
of the self-attention output to grow proportionally with the sequence length Lseq . This variance explosion results in unstable
training. Second, because ReLU maps all negative scores to
0, the resulting attention distribution becomes overly sparse.
Only a small number of tokens contribute meaningfully to
context aggregation, while most tokens are ignored. Therefore,
rather than merely increasing or decreasing sparsity, it is
essential to construct a ReLU-based attention distribution that
stabilizes the variance with respect to Lseq while avoiding
excessive sparsification. To achieve this goal, we introduce a
loss term that guides wE to adjust the scale of the ReLU-based
distribution according to the sequence length and to prevent
many tokens from collapsing to zero.
Notation. If we denote the scaled dot-product between the i-th
query vector qi and the j-th key vector kj as sij = qi k⊤
j , then
the unnormalized probability pij produced by Elemax and the
normalized probability p̂ij used during training are defined as
in Eq. (3):
pij
(3)
pij = wE (i) ReLU(sij ),
p̂ij = P
′
j ′ pij
Here, wE (i) denotes a token-wise learnable parameter associated with query position i.
Length-aware scale matching. Let the value vector for each
token be denoted by vj , and assume that its components are
mutually independent with variance σv2 . When an arbitrary
component of the value vector is denoted by vj , the variance
of the corresponding component in the context vector of token
i can be approximated as in Eq. (4):
hP
i
(4)
Var
p
v
≈ wE (i)2 neff2(i) σv2 .
ij
j
j
Here, Var[·] denotes the variance operator, and the effective
receptive length neff (i) represents the number of valid tokens
actually referenced by query i. In this expression, the variance
of the context vector components for token i is proportional to
neff (i), so the variance increases linearly as neff (i) grows. This
implies that even when vj shares the same distribution across
tokens, the scale of the attention output systematically changes
with the sequence length, and for longer sequences the norm of

5

the context vector becomes excessively large, which degrades
training stability. To control this variance growth, we introduce
an additional loss term Lscale for Elemaxpand encourage wE (i)
to learn the scaling pattern wE (i) ∝ 1/ neff (i) as a function
of the number of effective tokens. To this end, we define the
⋆
target value wE
(i) of the Elemax parameter for token i as
follows:
γh
⋆
(5)
wE
(i) = p
neff (i)/2
Here, h denotes the head index in MHA, and γh is a learnable
scalar associated with head h. We then introduce the following
scale loss Lscale so that the actual wE (i) follows Eq. (5):
2
λscale X 
⋆
log wE (i) − log wE
(i) ,
Lscale =
(6)
N
i
Here, N denotes the total number of tokens in the batch,
and λscale is a hyperparameter that controls the strength of
Lscale . As shown in Eq. (6), the scale loss Lscale directly
⋆
penalizes the discrepancy between
p wE (i) and wE (i), enforcing
the relationship wE (i) ∝ 1/ neff (i) across positions so that
the variance of the context output does not explode with
neff (i).
Distribution regularization. To address the second issue of
excessive sparsification in ReLU-based attention, we adapt
the regularization loss proposed in ReLUformer [14] to our
formulation of pij . First, the entropy of p̂i , denoted by H(p̂i ),
is defined as in Eq. (7):
X
H(p̂i ) = −
p̂ij log(p̂ij )
(7)
j

Using this entropy, we define the regularization loss Lreg as
in Eq. (8):
λreg X  X 
Lreg =
pij
log
N i
j
(8)


λreg X
+
max H(p̂i ) − C(neff (i)), 0 .
N i
Here, λreg is a hyperparameter that controls the strength of
Lreg , and C(·) denotes the entropy upper bound as a function
of length. Following ReLUformer [14], we set C(·) as follows:

C neff (i) = α log neff (i)
(9)
Here, α is a hyperparameter that controls the magnitude of
the
P entropy upper bound. The first term in Eq. (8) prevents
j pij from becoming excessively small, thereby avoiding
overly large sparsity in P . The second term applies a penalty
only when the entropy exceeds C(neff (i)), suppressing overuniform distributions and guiding the Elemax attention distribution not to become overly diffuse.
Final loss function. Finally, by combining all the components
above, we define the loss function as in Eq. (10):
Lfinal = Ltask + Lscale + Lreg ,

(10)

where Ltask is the standard cross-entropy-based task loss,
Lscale prevents the variance from exploding as the sequence
length increases, and Lreg ensures that the Elemax distribution
covers sufficient context without attention dilution. We train
the Elemax-based LLM using this loss function Lfinal .

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

V. SPARE-PIM: PIM- BASED DYNAMIC -S PARSITY
ACCELERATOR
SPARE-PIM architecture is a PIM that executes sparse
kernels which skip unnecessary memory accesses and computations, thereby reducing latency and energy consumption.
Specifically, SPARE-PIM uses the bitmask produced during
Elemax to obtain the valid operation count (VOC), and the
memory controller leverages this information in the subsequent
P V stage so that the corresponding operations incur only the
minimum required latency. To support this execution model,
we assume that all PIM and memory commands in the SPAREPIM architecture are issued in order and that out-of-order
command issuing is disabled [21].
A. Hardware architecture
Fig. 4 shows the overall hardware organization of SPAREPIM architecture. First, as illustrated in Fig. 4(a), SPARE-PIM
architecture is an HBM based 8-stack PIM architecture, where
eight DRAM dies and one logic die are stacked in 3D and
connected through through-silicon vias (TSVs). Each DRAM
die contains four channels, and each channel is divided into
two pseudo channels (pCH). A single pCH consists of four
bankgroups, and each bankgroup comprises four banks. A
bank-level processing unit (BPU) and a bankgroup metadata
unit (BGMU) are placed at each bank and bankgroup to exploit
dynamic sparsity. To allocate sufficient area for the in-memory
PIM logic, we also follow prior work [21], [27] and adopt a
configuration that halves the number of subarrays defined in
JEDEC HBM3 [33].
Fig. 4(b) shows the BPU placed at each bank in the DRAM
die. The BPU consists of several logic blocks to exploit the
dynamic sparsity produced by Elemax, and SPARE-PIM places
one BPU in every bank to fully utilize the internal memory
bandwidth at the bank level. The main components inside a
BPU are as follows:
• The floating-point SIMD unit (FSU) consists of halfprecision floating-point (FP16) multipliers and adders,
and performs operations on 16 elements simultaneously
in a single-instruction, multiple-data (SIMD) fashion.
• The vector buffer (VB) stores activation data (i.e., Q, S,
P ), and there are two VBs (i.e., VB-A and VB-B). Since
each VB can store two vectors, each consisting of sixteen
16-bit elements, a BPU can process up to 32 activation
values in a single flow. VB-A also includes a 16-bit scalar
register (SCR), which is used to broadcast one element
from VB-A to the arithmetic units inside the FSU. VB-B
contains simple gate-level logic that uses the sign bits of
the stored data to apply ReLU to all elements in VBB and then generates a bitmask based on the result. In
addition, VB-B is connected to the bank I/O so that it
can send and receive data in 256-bit chunks.
• The bitmask buffer stores the bitmask generated when
ReLU is executed. It can hold two sets of 16-bit values,
and each bit in the bitmask buffer corresponds to the order
of the activations stored in VB-B.
• The dynamic sparsity selection engine (DSSE) consists
of a valid data index (VDI) extractor, which identifies

6

the positions of non-zero elements based on the bitmask,
and an address calculator, which computes the valid
data address (VDA) for accessing the bank and VB. In
addition, a VOC counter is included to determine the
number of valid operations.
• The local controller contains a config file that stores
model configuration parameters required for computation,
and includes logic that decodes commands delivered from
the memory controller and controls the timing of the FSU,
buffers, and DSSE inside the BPU.
Fig. 4(c) shows the internal logic organization and behavior
of the BGMU. First, the VOC value delivered from the BPU
is stored in a register inside the BGMU. When the memory
controller issues a BGMU read request, the command decoder
in the BGMU controls an internal switch so that the BGMU
register is connected to the bankgroup I/O path, identical to
a normal bank access. As a result, the VOC data is returned
to the memory controller through the same interface as the
read data of a regular READ command, without requiring a
dedicated path. To distinguish a BGMU read from a normal
bank read, we reuse the most significant bits of the row
address. Because our architecture places only half of the
subarrays, the MSB of the row address is not used for actual
bank accesses and remains as a reserved bit. We use this bit as
the BGMU selection bit: when the MSB of the row address in
a READ command is 0, the command is interpreted as a normal
bank access, and when it is 1, the command is interpreted as
a BGMU access.
On the logic die, as shown in Fig. 4(a), a channel-level
accumulator (CA) is placed for each pCH. The CA sequentially collects partial-sums generated by multiple BPUs within
a pCH and accumulates them using an internal accumulator.
This design allows SPARE-PIM to fully exploit the bank-level
bandwidth it provides while enabling parallel processing.
B. Commands
To enable the operation of SPARE-PIM architecture, we
introduce five new commands. These commands consist of allbank (AB) execution commands (i.e., MAC, EMUL, MOV, SPM),
which are executed synchronously by all BPUs in a channel,
and a single-bank (SB) execution command (i.e., ACC), which
is executed only by a designated BPU. The role and timing
constraints of each command are summarized in Table I, and
their detailed behaviors are as follows:
• MAC selects data from the sense amplifier and the VB
based on the address encoded in the command, performs
multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations in the FSU, and
accumulates the partial-sum results in the VB.
• EMUL performs element-wise multiplication between two
vectors. Similar to MAC, it drives the multipliers in the
FSU according to the address specified in the command
and writes the results back to the VB.
• MOV is used to move data between the sense amplifier
and the VB. A flag in the command determines whether
ReLU is applied to the data stored in VB-B.
• SPM is a long-data command that performs sparse multiplication while reflecting sparsity. Once issued, it follows

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

7

Fig. 4. SPARE-PIM hardware architecture: (a) 8-stack HBM-based PIM with per-bank BPUs and per-bankgroup BGMUs, and per-pCH accumulators, (b)
microarchitecture of BPUs, and (c) microarchitecture and operation of BGMUs.

TABLE I
SPARE-PIM COMMANDS
CMD
MAC
EMUL
MOV
SPM
ACC

Description
Execute MAC.
Execute element-wise multiplication.
Move data between VB and bank (optional ReLU).
Execute sparse kernel (long-data command).
Accumulate channel-level partial-sum.

Timing
tCCDL
tCCDL
tCCDS

Exec.
AB
AB
AB

–

AB

tCCDL + 1

SB

the address sequence provided by the DSSE to access
memory and repeatedly performs MAC operations for
VOC times, while the memory controller dynamically
sets the execution latency of SPM in proportion to VOC.
• When ACC is issued, the designated bank sends the
partial-sum data stored in the VB to the logic die through
the I/O path, and the CA accumulates the incoming values
for each issued command to produce the final result.
All SPARE-PIM command set is mapped to the reservedfor-future-use (RFU) opcodes in the JEDEC command space
while preserving the standard HBM3 interface. All SPAREPIM architecture commands share the same command/address
bus as the standard ACT, READ, and WR commands, and
the memory controller schedules them under the same timing
constraints as regular HBM commands.
C. Execution flow
By replacing Softmax with Elemax, we propose ESEF,
which computes SDPA in a single pass by exploiting the
simplified computation flow and eliminating the overhead of
storing intermediate activations in the banks. First, as shown
in Fig. 5(a), SPARE-PIM architecture repeatedly issues MAC
commands that use Q stored in VB-A and K T data stored in
the banks to perform MAC operations. Each result is accumulated in VB-B, and this process continues until the final S

Fig. 5. Elemax-based SDPA execution flow (ESEF): (a) computation of QK T
to form the score vector S, (b) Elemax activation producing P and bitmasks,
and (c) sparse P V multiplication.

vector is formed. Once S is completed, the memory controller
issues a MOV command and applies ReLU to S stored in
VB-B, as illustrated in Fig. 5(b). During this step, the ReLU
logic simultaneously generates the corresponding bitmask, and
the generated bitmask is stored in the bitmask buffer. The
DSSE then uses this bitmask information to prepare for the
subsequent P V computation. After ReLU, when wE is ready
to be loaded from the bank into the computation units, an
EMUL command performs element-wise multiplication, and
the resulting P is stored in VB-A. Finally, for the P V
computation, the memory controller issues an SPM command,
as shown in Fig. 5(c). In this step, the BPU selectively accesses
only valid data based on the addresses generated by the DSSE
and performs sparse P V operations. Overall, ESEF computes
SDPA in a single pass while exploiting activation sparsity to
reduce the latency of P V .
D. Data Mapping
ESEF achieves its latency benefit only when the K T /V
data is placed in the DRAM banks according to the access
pattern required by the computation units. To this end, we
propose ESDM, a K T /V data mapping scheme that follows

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

8

Fig. 6. Elemax-based SDPA data mapping (ESDM) for a single attention
head, showing K T /V layout across banks.

ESEF while maximizing bank-level parallelism through allbank execution. Let Pbank denote the target degree of bank
parallelism for a single head. Fig. 6 illustrates the K T /V
layout for the case of Pbank = 2. We define an element chunk
as a group of consecutive elements processed simultaneously
by the FSU in SIMD fashion.
In ESDM, the K T /V elements associated with a single Q
or P element are placed so that the FSU can process them
simultaneously during MAC. Specifically, the K T matrix is
arranged so that consecutive element chunks along the dhead
dimension reside in adjacent DRAM columns within the same
row, and the entire dhead dimension is stored inside each bank.
This ensures that the generation of S from QK is completed
locally within a bank. Meanwhile, the V matrix is arranged so
that consecutive element chunks along Lseq appear in adjacent
DRAM columns of a row. This placement allows accessing
only the V elements corresponding to the activated P elements
determined by Elemax during the P V stage, thereby reducing
unnecessary memory accesses. As a result, the FSU can read
the required K T /V data in a continuous burst under pagehit conditions when processing a single Q or P element,
minimizing the number of ACT and PRE commands required
to repeatedly open and close DRAM rows.
When SDPA is executed with ESDM, each BPU computes
only the dot-product for a token range of size Lseq /Pbank
during the final P V stage of ESEF. Thus, when Pbank ≥ 2,
each bank produces only partial sums. The CA placed in each
channel collects and accumulates these partial sums through
the ACC command to form the final SDPA output. In addition,
the Elemax parameters are placed in the same bank and aligned
with the indices of S stored in VB-B, allowing elementwise multiplication to occur immediately without additional
reordering. When the batch size increases, different batches are
first distributed across different channels whenever possible.
If further channel-level distribution is not possible, additional
batches are stored sequentially in the remaining row space
of each bank while preserving ESDM. This maintains a high
page-hit rate and maximizes the internal bandwidth utilization
of SPARE-PIM architecture.
E. Deploying dynamic sparsity
For SPARE-PIM architecture to accelerate sparse P V , the
DSSE placed in each BPU must rapidly generate metadata
such as VDI and VOC and use it to ensure that only valid
data is accessed and processed. To achieve this, we overlap
the metadata generation with the Elemax execution time and

Fig. 7. Deploying dynamic sparsity inside the BPU: (a) timing of metadata
generation from Elemax, (b) architecture of the DSSE, and (c) micro-dataflow
in FSU when the sparse kernel is executed.

design the DSSE and FSU to perform memory accesses and
computations only on valid data.
Fig. 7(a) presents a timing diagram showing how the latency
of metadata generation is hidden during Elemax. When a MOV
command triggers ReLU, the generated bitmask is immediately used by the VDI extractor to obtain the VDI, which is
stored in a register, while the VOC counter computes the VOC
in parallel. At the MOV execution point, the BGMU resets its
register in preparation for the new VOC. Once VOC generation
completes, the new value is transferred to the BGMU in
the next cycle. The stored VOC is later used in the BGMU
read stage to quickly determine the valid operation length
for the channel. Because this logic is independent of Elemax
computation, the process of generating and storing metadata
can fully overlap with the element-wise multiplication of
Elemax without additional latency.
Fig. 7(b) and Fig. 7(c) illustrate how the DSSE generates
metadata from the bitmask and how this metadata guides the
sparse P V computation in the FSU. When SPM is issued, the
DSSE sequentially reads the stored VDI elements and supplies
them to the address calculator. The VB address calculator
converts each entry into VB-A/B addresses so that VB-A
selectively reads only the non-zero P elements, while VB-B
receives the destinations where MAC results will be written. In
parallel, the column address calculator computes the column
address of the V element corresponding to each non-zero P
entry and sends it to the column decoder, which selects and
forwards the valid V data to the FSU. The FSU then performs
MAC operations on the selected P and V values and stores the
result into the designated slot within the two 16×16-bit arrays
located beneath the FSU. During the execution of the sparse
kernel, VDI-based address generation, selective P /V retrieval,
MAC computation, and result storage operate in a pipelined
manner. Accessing only the data required by sparsity reduces
both memory-access latency and energy consumption.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

9

Algorithm 1 Flow for issuing SPM commands in the memory
controller
Require: BGMU aggregates VOCs from BPUs.
1: /* Read VOCs from BGMUs and find max count */
2: max count ← 0;
3: for bg = 0 to NBG − 1 do
4:
tmp ← READ(BGMR[bg]);
5:
if tmp > max count then
6:
max count ← tmp;
7:
end if
8: end for
9: /* Issue SPM commands */
10: if max count = 0 then
11:
skip {ACT, SPM, PRE};
12: else
13:
for each bank in the channel do
14:
issue ACT;
15:
end for
16:
issue SPM(max count);
17:
for each bank in the channel do
18:
issue PRE;
19:
end for
20: end if
21: return ;

F. Sparse Kernel Execution
For operation skipping in SPARE-PIM to have a real impact
on inference latency, the architecture must ensure that the
sparse kernel executes only for the minimum latency proportional to VOC. To achieve this, the memory controller reads
the VOC values from the BGMUs placed in each bankgroup,
determines the maximum VOC among them, and configures
the latency of the SPM command accordingly before issuing
it. The control flow for determining the SPM execution latency
is summarized in Algorithm 1.
As shown in Fig. 4(c), after Elemax computation completes,
the memory controller issues a standard READ command with
the BG address and a flag (i.e., MSB of the row address)
set high. This READ command is delivered to the BGMU’s
command decoder, and when it is identified as a BGMUtargeted access, the BGMU connects the VOC data stored
in its register to the bankgroup I/O path and returns it to
the controller. The BGMU read latency follows the standard
HBM3 timing constraints and is modeled as Eq. (11):
LBGMU = tCL + (NBG − 1) tCCD

S

+ tBURST .

(11)

Here, NBG denotes the number of bankgroups in a channel.
The first term tCL is the column access latency of the
first READ, (NBG − 1)tCCD S captures the spacing between
consecutive READ commands, and the last term tBURST is the
final data-burst duration. The BGMU read latency is the sum
of these components.
As READ commands are issued sequentially to each BGMU
in the channel, the VOC values are returned to the memory
controller, which updates the running maximum whenever a
new VOC is received (Algorithm 1, line 1–8). The controller
then issues ACT commands to activate the target row in

TABLE II
LLM CONFIGURATIONS USED IN EXPERIMENTS .
Model
GPT-baby
GPT-3-small
TinyLlama
Llama3.2-3B

Layer
6
12
22
28

Head
6
12
32
24

KV head
6
12
4
8

Emb d
384
768
2048
3072

Seq len
256
1024
2048
4096

Inter size
1536
3072
5632
8192

TABLE III
SPARE-PIM CONFIGURATION
Component
Technology
Die / Channel
pCH
Bankgroup
Bank

Description
HBM3
1/4
2
8
4

Component
Description
Row / Column
8192 / 32
Burst length
8
Clock freq.
1 GHz
Bandwidth
1024 GB/s
Capacity
8 GB
Timing parameters
tBL = 4, tRP = 14, tRCD = 14, tRAS = 34, tRRD L = 6,
tCL = 18, tCCD S = 1, tCCD L = 2, tF AW = 30

all banks, followed by an all-bank long-data SPM command
whose latency is configured according to the maximum VOC,
and finally issues PRE after the sparse kernel completes.
If the maximum VOC collected from all BGMUs is zero,
indicating there is no valid work in any bank of the channel,
the controller branches on this condition and skips the entire
ACT–SPM–PRE sequence for that token, proceeding directly
to the next command (Algorithm 1, line 9–21).
To support SPARE-PIM, the memory controller must incorporate additional logic that processes BGMU metadata
and configures the SPM execution length. This enables the
architecture to preserve all-bank execution while minimizing
unnecessary latency and memory-access energy consumption.
VI. E VALUATION
A. Experimental Setup
Elemax. To evaluate the accuracy of Elemax, we use
four models of different sizes, whose detailed configurations are summarized in Table II. We select datasets
from a variety of tasks (e.g., WikiText-103 [34], OPUS100 [35], CNN/DailyMail [36], Python-Codes-25K [37],
OpenMathInstruct-1 [38], and OpenWebText2 [39]) and split
each dataset into training and validation sets. All models are
trained from scratch in FP16 precision without pretrained
weights. Llama3.2-3B is trained on two A100 80 GB GPUs,
whereas the other models are trained on two RTX 3090
GPUs. Due to its larger scale, Llama3.2-3B is trained on the
OpenWebText2 [39] dataset.
SPARE-PIM architecture. To evaluate SPARE-PIM architecture, we build an in-house simulator based on an opensource memory simulator [40]. SPARE-PIM architecture is
designed on top of HBM3 [33], and its detailed configuration
is summarized in Table III. For the CPU baseline, we use an
Intel i9-10900X processor running at 3.7 GHz, with 10 cores
and 19.25 MB of cache. For GPU experiments, we use an
NVIDIA RTX 3090, which operates at 1.40 GHz (about 1.4×
higher frequency than SPARE-PIM architecture) and provides
936.2 GB/s of memory bandwidth.

